In our last section, we learned what is the difference between a REST API and a GraphQL API.

Let's now talk about WebSocket.

A WebSocket is a communication protocol that provides a persistent, bi-directional communication channel over a single TCP connection.

This is the important part to understand.

In REST APIs, the communication is request-response.

    Client -> Request -> Server
    Client <- Response <- Server

After that, the request-response cycle is over.

But with WebSockets, the client and server create a long-lived connection. Once the connection is established, both sides can send messages anytime.

    Client <---- WebSocket Connection ----> Server

So, why was there a need for WebSockets?

The traditional HTTP works well for things like CRUD operations, fetching resources or transactional workflows.

But, when it comes to real-time applications, it becomes inefficient. For example Real-time chat applications, Trading platforms with live price updates, online gaming, notifications, Collaborative editing, and so on.

If we use REST APIs for these, then we have to continuously poll the server to know if there is any update in the data. Polling creates unnecessary load.

## POLLING

Polling is when the client repeatedly asks the server for updates. There are various downsides to this approach.

For example, what if the message arrives immediately after a poll? This means, the client won't see it until the next poll so there is a Poll interval.

Moreover, most poll requests return nothing so they are just wasted.

Suppose we are building a chat application.

If the client polls every 10 seconds, a new message may arrive just after a poll request. The user may not see that message for almost 10 seconds.

If we reduce the interval to 1 second, the app feels more real-time, but now every client is sending one request every second.

If we have 1 million users, that becomes 1 million requests per second just to check whether something changed.

That is wasteful.

## LONG POLLING

There is also Long polling where the client requests updates and the server keeps the requests open until the data exists.

    Client → Request
        Waiting...
        Waiting...
    Server → Response when data arrives

And after the response is received, the client immediately sends another request.

This has a lower latency than the regular polling but the issue here is continuous HTTP connection creation and it is more expensive than WebSockets.

# WEBSOCKETS

WebSockets start as an HTTP request. So, the client sends -

    GET /socket

    Upgrade: websocket
    Connection: Upgrade

Instead of returning a response and closing the connection, the server sends an HTTP 101 status code which indicates that the protocol is being switches to WebSockets -

    HTTP/1.1 101 Switching Protocols

After this, the connection changes from HTTP to WebSocket.

So, the connection now remains open.

Websockets have a full-duplex communication. In normal HTTP, we have requests and responses -

    Client asks
    Server answers

In Websockets -

    Client can send data to server anytime
    Server can send data to client anytime

So, both sides can send messages at any time. So, on the same connection, the following can take place -

    Client -> Server: User is typing
    Server -> Client: New message received
    Client -> Server: Message sent
    Server -> Client: Friend came online

Any side can close the connection.

# WEBSOCKETS vs HTTP

Websockets and HTTP are both used for communication between client and server, but they are useful for different things.

HTTP is best when the client requests something and gets a response. For example loading a webpage, fetching product details, submitting a form, getting user profile, searching products, etc.

WebSocket is best when data needs to move in real time between the client and the server. For example chat messages, live notifications, multiplayer game movement, real-time stock prices, collaborative editing updates and so on.

The main difference is that in HTTP the client asks and the server responds whereas in WebSocket, both client and server can talk anytime.

# DOWNSIDES OF WEBSOCKETS

WebSockets are useful, but they also introduce complexity.

The first downside is connection management. In HTTP, each request is independent. But with WebSockets, the server needs to maintain many open connections.

If 1 million users are online, the system may need to maintain 1 Million active websocket connections. This requires careful resource management.

The second downside is scaling. With normal HTTP, any server can handle any request if the application is stateless. But with WebSockets, a client is connected to one specific server. For example -

    User A -> WebSocket Server 1

If another service wants to send a message to User A, it has to know first that User A is connected to Server 1. This makes horizontal scaling more complex.

The third downside is handling reconnection. Mobile networks are unstable and many users may disconnect and reconnect frequently. So, the application needs to handle reconnection, duplicate messages, missed messages, connection timeouts, heartbeats etc.

Finally, WebSockets can be overkill in some cases. If the app only needs occasional updates, polling or SSE is simpler.

# WHAT ARE HEARTBEATS?

A heartbeat is a small message sent periodically to check whether the connection is still alive.

    Client -> Server: ping
    Server -> Client: pong

OR

    Server -> Client: ping
    Client -> Server: pong

This helps detect broken connections.

Sometimes a connection may look open, but the client has actually gone away due to network issues.

Heartbeats help the server clean up dead connections.

Without heartbeats, the server may keep storing connections that are no longer useful.

# SCALING WEBSOCKETS

Scaling WebSockets is more complex than scaling simple HTTP APIs.

Suppose we have three WebSocket servers -

    WebSocket Server 1
    WebSocket Server 2
    WebSocket Server 3

A load balancer may distribute new WebSocket connections across these servers like -

    Client A -> Server 1
    Client B -> Server 2
    Client C -> Server 3

Now, let's say the Client B sends a message to Client A. In this case, Server 2 needs a way to send that message to Server 1. So, we usually need a shared connection between WebSocket servers.

Some common solutions include Redis Pub/Sub, Kafka, RabbitMQ, NATS, Managed Websocket services etc. 

The idea is that WebSocket servers should be able to exchange events with each other.

For example -

    Client B -> Server 2
    Server 2 -> Redis Pub/Sub
    Redis Pub/Sub -> Server 1
    Server 1 -> Client A

# AUTHENTICATION IN WEBSOCKETS

In WebSockets, the authentication is usually done during connection setup. For example, the client may send a token while connecting -

    Client -> Server:
        Connect with token abc123

The server then verifies the token.

If the token is valid, the server accepts the connection, otherwise it rejects it.

After the connection is accepted, the server usually stores the information about the connection. For example -

    connectionId -> userId
    connectionId -> roomId
    userId -> connectionId

This helps the server know which user is connected through which WebSocket connection.

# ROOMS AND CHANNELS

Many WebSocket applications use the concept of rooms or channels. A room is a group of connections that should receive the same messages. For example in a Chat app -

    room-1 has:
        User A
        User B
        User C


If User A sends a message to room-1, the user broadcasts the message to User B and C -

    User A -> Server: Hello room-1
    Server -> User B: Hello room-1
    Server -> User C: Hello room-1

Rooms are useful in Chat rooms, Game rooms, collaboration documents, Live dashboards, Notification groups etc.

But do note that WebSockets itself do not provide rooms. Rooms are implemented at the app level. Libraries like Socket.IO provide room-like features on top of WebSockets.

# EXAMPLE

Let's say we are designing a real-time chat application. A simple version might be -

    Client -> Load Balancer -> WebSocket Server -> Database

But, as the traffic grows we add multiple WebSocket servers -

    Client A -> Load Balancer -> WebSocket Server 1
    Client B -> Load Balancer -> WebSocket Server 2
    Client C -> Load Balancer -> WebSocket Server 3

Now, the issue is that the users connected to different servers still need to message each other. So, we add a message broker -

    Client A -> WebSocket Server 1
    WebSocket Server 1 -> Message Broker
    Message Broker -> WebSocket Server 2
    WebSocket Server 2 -> Client B

We may also need a database to store messages -

    WebSocket Server -> Database

So, the complete system may look like -

    Client
        -> Load Balancer
        -> WebSocket Servers
        -> Message Broker
        -> Database

For example, when User A sends a message to User B -

    1. User A sends message to WebSocket Server 1
    2. Server 1 validates the message
    3. Server 1 stores the message in database
    4. Server 1 publishes an event to the message broker
    5. Server 2 receives the event because User B is connected there
    6. Server 2 sends the message to User B

This allows the system to scale horizontally.
