DNS means Domain Name System. It has one job and that's to translate human-friendly names into IP Addresses.

For example, we use addresses like -

    google.com
    amazon.com
    api.myapp.com

But computers route packets using IP addresses like:

    142.250.193.78

So DNS answers this question:

    What IP address belongs to this domain name?

A Domain Name is like the contact's name in your phone but the IP Address is like the actual phone number. So, DNS is like a contact app.

Without DNS, you would need to remember IP addresses for every website. DNS also gives system designers flexibility. A company can change the server behind a domain without forcing users to remember a new address.

    api.shop.com -> old server IP
    api.shop.com -> new load balancer IP

    Users still call api.shop.com; DNS can point that name somewhere else.

A DNS usually uses UDP port 53 but sometimes it may use TCP port 53. UDP is common because DNS queries are usually small and fast.

# BASIC DNS FLOW

Alright, let's see what really happens.

Suppose you type:

    www.example.com

Your browser wants to open www.example.com, but it cannot send packets to the name itself. The network needs an IP address.

Browsers often remember DNS results for a short time. So, the browser checks its own cache.

If the browser does not know, it asks the OS or the Operating System. The OS may also have a DNS cache.

If the OS does not know either, then the computer sends a DNS Query to a 'Recursive Resolver. Tis resolver is usually provided by the ISP, the company network, or a public DNS provider like Google DNS 8.8.8.8 or Cloudflare DNS 1.1.1.1.' 

At this point, your computer is basically saying:

    Please find the IP address for www.example.com for me.

The recursive resolver now does the hard work.

It starts from the top of the DNS hierarchy: the root DNS servers. The root server usually does not know the final IP. But it knows where to find TLD servers like .com, .org, .net, .in etc.

So the root server replies:

    I do not know www.example.com directly. Ask the .com TLD servers.

Now the resolver goes to a TLD server. TLD means top-level domain. In our example, the TLD is '.com'.

The .com server also usually does not know the final IP. But it knows which 'Authoritative Name Servers' are responsible for example.com.

Now the resolver asks the authoritative DNS server for example.com. The 'Authoritative Name Server' holds the actual DNS records for that domain. So, it replies with something like -

    www.example.com has IP address 93.184.216.34

Now the recursive resolver has the answer. It sends that answer back to your computer.

Your computer gives the IP address to the browser.

Now DNS is done.

Only after this does the browser start connecting to the website:

    Browser -> 93.184.216.34

So remember -

    DNS does not load the website. DNS only finds the address.

# DNS RECORDS

DNS stores different types of records. A DNS record is an entry inside a DNS zone that tells the world something about a domain.

A domain can have many DNS records:

    example.com
    www.example.com
    api.example.com
    mail.example.com

Each record has a specific purpose.

A DNS record usually has these parts:

    Name / Host        Type     Value / Target        TTL
    www.example.com     A        93.184.216.34        300

TTL means 'Time To Live.'

## A RECORD

This record maps a domain to an IPv4 address like -

    example.com -> 93.184.216.34

Use A records when you want a name to point to an IPv4 server, load balancer, or public endpoint. For example -

    api.myapp.com     A     203.0.113.10

It means, the traffic for 'api.myapp.com' should go to IPv4 address '203.0.113.10'.

## AAAA RECORD

This record maps a domain to an IPv6 address like -

    example.com     AAAA     2606:2800:220:1:248:1893:25c8:1946

So, a domain can have both 'A' and 'AAAA' records -

    example.com     A        93.184.216.34
    example.com     AAAA     2606:2800:220:1:248:1893:25c8:1946

Then clients that support IPv6 may prefer IPv6, while others use IPv4.

## CNAME RECORD

A CNAME record means canonical name. It creates an alias from one domain name to another domain name. For example -

    www.example.com     CNAME     example.com

So here, 'www.example.com' is an alias for 'example.com'.  This means, if a user visits 'www.example.com' then the DNS follows the CNAME to 'example.com' and then it looks up the 'A' or 'AAAA' record for 'example.com'.

Another example can be -

    blog.example.com     CNAME     myblog.hostingprovider.com

This means your blog subdomain points to the hosting provider’s domain.

Note that CNAME points to another name, not directly to an IP Address. CNAME is useful when the target IP may change, especially with cloud services. For example, your cloud provider may manage -

    my-load-balancer-123.cloudprovider.com

Its IPs may change behind the scenes. Your DNS can simply alias to that name.

## MX RECORD

An MX record tells DNS where email for a domain should be delivered. MX stands for Mail Exchange.

For example -

    example.com     MX     10   mail.example.com

It means, Send email for user@example.com to mail.example.com.

Note the number in the record. This is the priority. Lower number means higher priority.

So, if we have -

    example.com     MX     10   mail1.example.com
    example.com     MX     20   mail2.example.com

Mail servers will try 'mail1.example.com' first. If that fails, they try 'mail2.example.com'. MX records usually point to hostnames, not raw IP addresses. Then those hostnames need A or AAAA records.

## TXT RECORD

A TXT record stores text information for a domain. It is very flexible. The common use cases are Domain Ownership Verification, Email Security, SPF, DMARC, DKIM, Site Verification etc. For example -

    example.com     TXT     "google-site-verification=abc123"

This proves to Google that you control the domain.

## NS RECORD

An NS record says which name servers are authoritative for a domain. NS stands for Name Server.

For example -

    example.com     NS     ns1.dnsprovider.com
    example.com     NS     ns2.dnsprovider.com

It means these name servers hold the DNS records for example.com. When a resolver wants to know something about example.com, the parent zone .com points it to these authoritative name servers.

NS records are essential for delegation. For example -

    sub.example.com     NS     ns1.otherprovider.com

This can delegate 'sub.example.com' to another DNS provider.

## SOA RECORD

SOA means Start of Authority. Every DNS zone has an SOA record. It contains administrative information about the zone. For example -

    example.com     SOA     ns1.example.com     admin.example.com   2026052401  3600    900     1209600     300

It includes:

    - Primary authoritative name server
    - Responsible admin email
    - Serial number
    - Refresh interval
    - Retry interval
    - Expire time
    - Minimum TTL

The SOA record is especially important for DNS zone management and synchronization between authoritative DNS servers. The serial number changes when DNS records are updated. Secondary DNS servers use it to know whether they need to sync changes.

## PTR RECORD

A PTR record is used for reverse DNS.

So, normal DNS is -

    example.com -> 93.184.216.34

Reverse DNS is -

    93.184.216.34 -> example.com

PTR records are commonly used by mail servers, logging systems, and security tools.

# REAL WORLD EXAMPLE

Lets say -

    You own a domain: myshop.com
    You bought it from: Namecheap
    You host DNS on: Cloudflare
    Your app runs on: AWS
    Your email runs on: Google Workspace

Now let’s map the DNS pieces.

## 1. DOMAIN REGISTRAR

The registrar is where you bought the domain. So, Namecheap, Godaddy, Cloudflare Registrar etc are all Domain Registrars. The registrar does not necessarily host all your DNS records. It mainly controls ownership and tells the internet which name servers are responsible for your domain.

## 2. AUTHORiTATIVE DNS SERVERS

The authoritative DNS servers are the servers that hold the real DNS records for your domain.

Suppose you use Cloudflare DNS. Cloudflare may give you name servers like:

    anna.ns.cloudflare.com
    tom.ns.cloudflare.com

Then in your registrar settings, you set:

    myshop.com nameservers:
        anna.ns.cloudflare.com
        tom.ns.cloudflare.com

Now Cloudflare is authoritative for myshop.com.

This means -

    If anyone in the world wants the official DNS answer for myshop.com, they eventually ask Cloudflare’s authoritative DNS servers.

Cloudflare stores records like:

    myshop.com          A       203.0.113.10
    www.myshop.com      CNAME   myshop.com
    api.myshop.com      CNAME   aws-load-balancer.amazonaws.com
    myshop.com          MX      Google mail servers
    myshop.com          TXT     Google verification / SPF / DKIM

So, the DNS flow is like this -

    Browser asks OS:
    "What is the IP for www.myshop.com?"

    OS asks recursive resolver:
    "Please find www.myshop.com."

    Recursive resolver asks root DNS:
    "Who handles .com?"

    Root DNS says:
    "Ask the .com TLD servers."

    Resolver asks .com TLD:
    "Who is responsible for myshop.com?"

    .com TLD says:
    "The authoritative name servers are anna.ns.cloudflare.com and tom.ns.cloudflare.com."

    Resolver asks Cloudflare authoritative server:
    "What is www.myshop.com?"

    Cloudflare replies:
    "www.myshop.com is a CNAME to myshop.com."

    Resolver then asks:
    "What is myshop.com?"

    Cloudflare replies:
    "myshop.com has A record 203.0.113.10."

    Resolver returns IP to user's computer.

    Browser connects to:
    203.0.113.10







 















